.. title: Crunchbang Linux on the Acer Aspire One
.. slug: node-16
.. date: 2008-12-14 19:58:59
.. tags: linux,aspireone
.. link:
.. description: 
.. type: text

I did the following to install `Crunchbang <http://crunchbang.org/>`__
(8.10) on my Acer Aspire One (SSD). (Most is taken from
https://help.ubuntu.com/community/AspireOne, which has more detailed
information. This is just a reminder for myself.)

-  Create a bootable usb stick from the iso image using
   `unetbootin <http://unetbootin.sourceforge.net/>`__.
-  Install crunchbang, choosing ext2 file systems.
-  Download, compile and install
   `madwifi <http://snapshots.madwifi-project.org/madwifi-hal-0.10.5.6/madwifi-hal-0.10.5.6-r3835-20080801.tar.gz>`__,
   and add ``ath_pci`` to ``/etc/modules``.
-  Add the following to ``/etc/rc.local`` to enable the wireless
   led:

::


  sysctl -w dev.wifi0.ledpin=3
  sysctl -w dev.wifi0.softled=1
  



-  Install ``luvcview`` to use the webcam. This doesn't work yet.
-  Download `acerfand <http://electronpusher.org/~rachel/acerfand>`__
   and
   `acer\_ec.pl <http://aceracpi.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/acer_ec/acer_ec.pl>`__
   into ``/usr/local/bin``, and make ``acerfand`` executable. Check
   wether ``sudo perl acer_ec.pl ?= 58`` returns something that could be
   the cpu temperature (hexacecimal), and add this line to
   ``/etc/rc.local`` to keep the fan down if the CPU temperature is
   below 70°:

::

  /usr/local/bin/acerfand

-  Edit ``/etc/fstab`` and change the the option “relatime” to
   “noatime”.
-  Add ``elevator=noop`` as boot option for the current kernel, and to
   the ``# defoptions`` line.
-  Add the following to
   ``/etc/fstab``:


::


  tmpfs      /tmp            tmpfs        defaults           0    2
  tmpfs      /var/tmp        tmpfs        defaults           0    2
  



-  Change ``concurrency=none`` into ``concurrency=shell`` in
   ``/etc/init.d/rc``
-  For power saving, create a file ``/etc/sysctl.d/60-aspireone.conf``
   with the following
   content:

::


  ###################################################################
  # Settings for the Acer Aspire One
  #
  # Strongly discourage swapping
  vm.swappiness = 1
  # As suggested by PowerTOP
  vm.dirty_writeback_centisecs = 1500
  # Suggested by https://help.ubuntu.com/community/AspireOne
  vm.vfs_cache_pressure = 0
  vm.dirty_ratio = 20
  vm.dirty_background_ratio = 10
  vm.laptop_mode = 5
  


-  Add
   the following to
   ``/etc/rc.local``:


::


  echo ondemand > /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu0/cpufreq/scaling_governor
  echo ondemand > /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu1/cpufreq/scaling_governor
  cat /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu0/cpufreq/ondemand/sampling_rate_max > /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu0/cpufreq/ondemand/sampling_rate
  
  echo 1 > /sys/devices/system/cpu/sched_smt_power_savings
  echo 10 > /sys/module/snd_hda_intel/parameters/power_save
  
  ### Decrease power usage of USB while idle
  ## commented out; doesn't seem to work
  # [ -w /sys/bus/usb/devices/1-5/power/level ] && echo auto > /sys/bus/usb/devices/1-5/power/level
  # [ -w /sys/bus/usb/devices/5-5/power/level ] && echo auto > /sys/bus/usb/devices/5-5/power/level
  



-  Add the following line to
   ``/etc/profile``:


::


  export INTEL_BATCH=1
  



-  Change the section 'Device' in
   ``/etc/X11/xorg.conf``.

::


  Section "Device"
          Identifier      "Configured Video Device"
  #       Driver          "vesa"
          Option          "MonitorLayout" "LVDS,VGA"
          Option          "Clone" "True"
          Option          "AccelMethod" "EXA"
          Option          "MigrationHeuristic" "greedy"
          VideoRam        229376
          Option          "CacheLines" "1980"
          Option "NoDDC" 
  EndSection
  


-  and
   add this line to the 'Monitor'
   section:

::


          DisplaySize 195 113
  



Interesting firefox add-ons:

-  `stop or reload
   button <https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/313>`__
-  `personal
   menu <https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/3895>`__
-  `autohide status
   bar <https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/1530>`__

Add the string ``browser.cache.disk.parent_directory`` to
Firefox's about:config, and assign the value ``/tmp/firefox``. In
'options', 'security' disable the phishing filter. (dangerous!)
