.. title: Cyanogenmod on the Samsung Galaxy S wifi 5 (Samsung Galaxy Player 5)
.. slug: node-203
.. date: 2013-03-20 22:56:49
.. tags: android,cyanogenmod
.. link:
.. description: 
.. type: text

Cyanogenmod on the Samsung Galaxy S wifi 5 (Samsung Galaxy Player 5)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

I had the chance to buy a Samsung Galaxy S wifi 5: It's not a phone, it
's not a tablet, it's something in between. I got a special price ;-) so
I could buy it just to mess with it. If I break it, so be it.

Of course, I wanted to replace the default firmware by a clean system:
CyanogenMod. Unfortunately, there is no official CyanogenMod version for
this device. I thought there was, but I was confused. There are a lot of
devices called 'Samsung Galaxy S', and they all use incompatible
hardware. So the installation was a little harder than I expected.

Replace the recovery image
--------------------------

I found this very useful walkthrough to replace the recovery image:

-  `How to root and install ClockWorkMod recovery on Galaxy Player
   5.0 <http://www.androidegis.com/how-to/how-to-root-and-install-clockworkmod-recovery-cwm-on-galaxy-player-5-0-any-variant-expect-korean/#comment-25222>`__

I did install the `Samsung USB drivers for mobile
phones <http://forum.xda-developers.com/showthread.php?t=961956>`__ on
beforehand, I am not sure this was necessary, but it is likely it is.
(Remember: I am clueless, as always.)

If you went throught the steps, you can boot into the ClockWorkMod
recovery by pressing the volume-up button while turning on the device.

Download and flash the images for CM9
-------------------------------------

I found a lot of ROMS for the Samsung Galaxy Player on
`theunlockr.com <http://theunlockr.com/category/roms-2/android-roms-2/samsung-galaxy-player-roms/>`__.
I picked 'CM9 for Galaxy Player 5.0 ROM' (because I am not in the USA),
and I followed the links to

-  `CM9 for Galaxy Player 5.0 INTL, USA and KOR
   devices <http://forum.xda-developers.com/showthread.php?t=1679957>`__.

Download the **stable** version. Which I did not notice, because the
link was in red. Probably to draw the attention. Which did not work for
me :-). I first installed an old version, so I lost a lot of time.

The extra's seem to be useful as well. I installed all of them. For the
GApps, I took the most recent for ics (gapps-ics-20120429-signed.zip),
and for the 'home fix for INTL users', I took version 2.

I put all the zips on the sd-card. I rebooted into recovery, created a
backup, and installed all images. (Cyanogenmod first, then all the
rest.) Factory reset, clear cache, reboot, done.

What does not work:
-------------------

-  Camera
-  Transferring files via USB from/to the sd-card.
-  The hardware button in the middle under the screen doesn't seem to do
   anything.
-  Installing apps on the SD-card.

Other versions?
---------------

There is a `thread about
CM10 <http://forum.xda-developers.com/showthread.php?t=2077671>`__ on
the xda-developers forum, but this `does not
work <http://forum.xda-developers.com/showpost.php?p=39353117&postcount=1025>`__,
and development on this version seems to have stopped.

There is a `ROM for
CM7 <http://theunlockr.com/2012/03/15/cm7-for-player-5-0-rom/>`__ as
well. Maybe with a working camera. I still have to try this out.

About the SD-card problems
--------------------------

There are some issues with the SD-card, but I im unsure which ones.

Some apps (like e.g. Mustard) want to install on the SD-card. So the
installation from the market fails.

If you remount / as rw, using the terminal: `` mount -o rw,remount /``

installation works, and the apps run. That is, until you reboot the
device. Then the app is 'not found' when you try to run it.

Another problem: if you now open the 'app management' screen, the system
crashes after a few seconds.

To install Mustard, I did the following:

-  remount / as rw
-  install mustard
-  open app management, show the apps on SD-card, and uncheck mustard. I
   had to be very quick, before the crash.

