.. title: Improving security of the Acer Aspire One.
.. slug: node-14
.. date: 2008-11-09 15:34:31
.. tags: linux,aspireone
.. link:
.. description: 
.. type: text

By default, every user on my Linux powered Acer Aspire One can sudo any
command without having to enter a password. I think this is a bad thing,
because this way anyone (or everything) that can access your computer as
a local user, can do anything on the system.

The problem is caused
by the configuration of sudo, which contains these
lines:

\ 

::


  ## Allows people in group wheel to run all commands
   %wheel ALL=(ALL)       ALL
  
  ## Same thing without a password
   %wheel ALL=(ALL)       NOPASSWD: ALL
  



(to
see/edit the sudo config file, issue ``sudo visudo`` in a terminal
window.) Commenting out the line below 'Same thing without a password'
is not an option, because the network (and other things) will not start
after starting xfce.

It seems that when xfce is started, a list of
commands is executed, some of which are called with 'sudo'. I don't know
which script is containing these commands, so I turned on sudo logging.
This can be done adding the following lines to the sudo
config:
\ 

::


  Defaults loglinelen=0 # disable line wrapping in log.
  Defaults logfile=/var/log/sudo.log # or some other filename.
  



When
logging on again, you can see in /var/log/sudo.log the commands that
were executed with
sudo:
\ 

::


  /usr/bin/gnome-keyring-daemon
  /bin/mv /usr/bin/xfce-mcs-manager.new /usr/bin/xfce-mcs-manager
  /bin/mv /usr/bin/xfce-mcs-manager /usr/bin/xfce-mcs-manager.new
  /sbin//modprobe ath_pci
  /sbin//modprobe wlan_scan_sta
  /sbin//modprobe wlan_acl
  /sbin//modprobe wlan_wep
  /sbin//modprobe wlan_xauth
  /sbin//modprobe wlan_ccmp
  /sbin//modprobe wlan_tkip
  /usr/local/bin/wlanconfig ath0 create wlandev wifi0 wlanmode sta
  /sbin//ifconfig ath0 up
  /etc/init.d/network start
  /etc/init.d/netfs start
  /etc/init.d/udev-post start
  /etc/init.d/ConsoleKit start
  /etc/init.d/cups start
  /etc/init.d/wpa_supplicant start
  /etc/init.d/NetworkManager start
  /etc/init.d/NetworkManagerDispatcher start
  /etc/init.d/crond start
  /usr/bin/nm-applet
  /sbin/iwpriv ath0 powersave 1
  /sbin//fdisk -l
  /sbin//swapon -a
  /sbin//iwpriv ath0 powersave 1
  



These
commands are probably somewhere in a script, but I did not find out yet
which one.

Anyway, I added the following lines to the sudo
configuration
script
\ 

::


  Cmnd_Alias JOHAN = /usr/bin/gnome-keyring-daemon,/sbin/modprobe,/usr/local/bin/wlanconfig \
  ,/sbin/ifconfig,/etc/init.d/network,/etc/init.d/netfs,/etc/init.d/udev-post \
  ,/etc/init.d/ConsoleKit,/etc/init.d/cups,/etc/init.d/wpa_supplicant,/etc/init.d/NetworkManager \
  ,/etc/init.d/NetworkManagerDispatcher,/etc/init.d/crond,/usr/bin/nm-applet,/sbin/iwpriv \
  ,/sbin/swapon
  
   %test ALL=(ALL)        ALL
   %test ALL=NOPASSWD: JOHAN
  



Now
every user added to the 'test' group, has to enter a password when
sudo'ing, except for the commands issued when logging on.

I'm aware
of the fact that this is still not the most secure solution. Things like
'swapon' should already be run before the user is logged on. It would
also be better to group the commands executed when logging on in a
special script. The test users would then only need passwordless sudo
rights on this script.

