.. title: Ubuntu Hardy on my Acer Aspire One
.. slug: node-15
.. date: 2008-12-02 21:00:39
.. tags: linux,aspireone
.. link:
.. description: 
.. type: text

I installed Ubuntu Hardy on my Acer Aspire One. Accidentally in
fact.

I wanted to install the Ubuntu Netbook remix on an external
USB disk on my AAO, using the image I found here
http://oem-images.canonical.com/unr/. I booted the USB image. It warned
me it would wipe my hard disk. Nevertheless I booted, and indeed, it
started erasing my internal harddisk instead of my external one :-/ (I
thought I would be able to choose a target hard disk; I
wasn't.)

After the installation, my system wouldn't boot. So I
decided to manually install Ubuntu, using the procedure on
https://help.ubuntu.com/community/AspireOne.

Everything seemed to
work, except the webcam. And even after applying the various tweaks in
the wiki article, the system still was slow.

I stil had a copy of
the kernel configuration of the original Linpus installation. So I used
that one to compile a new kernel, using the old kernel configuration.
(See
https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Kernel/Compile#Alternate%20Build%20Method:%20The%20Old-Fashioned%20Debian%20Way
) I enabled LVM, because I use this on my external hard disk, for
flexible partition management.

Booting the new kernel resulted in
two problems. First of all klogd didn't start. Apparently kernel logging
was not enabled in the original kernel. So I removed the klogd package,
which removed sysklogd and ubuntu-minimal as well.

Sound didn't
work either. I guess Ubuntu uses alsa, and linpus uses OSS or something.
So I added alsa support to my kernel configuration, including the
intel-hda sound thing. After adding this to /etc/modprobe.d/alsa-base,
sound was
working:

\ ``\noptions snd-hda-intel model=toshiba\n``

Now the
system boots. To speed it up a little more, I installed xubuntu-desktop,
so I can log on into an xubuntu session. I clicked 'Applications',
'Preferences', 'Configuration Manager', 'Autostarted Apps', and only
left energy manager, volume management and network manager checked. (My
printer isn't supported anyway.)

That's how the system is
configured right now. The webcam is not working, and there is probably
room for a lot of improvements. My current kernel config is attached.

