.. title: Automatic beer label recognition
.. slug: node-162
.. date: 2011-02-01 16:28:44
.. tags: opensource,bier,android
.. link:
.. description: 
.. type: text

Yesterday, the Antwerp pub
‘\ `Kulminator <http://www.ratebeer.com/Places/ShowPlace.asp?PlaceID=533>`__\ ’
was nominated by `ratebeer.com <http://ratebeer.com>`__ as `Best Beer
Pub <http://ur1.ca/33021>`__. I work in Antwerp, and yesterday after
work, I went over there with a couple of collegues, to enjoy some
beer.

We talked about beers, and I showed my collegues the
`remembeer <http://remembeer.info/>`__ app on my Android phone. This app
allows you to log the beers you drink, and to rate them. But as it turns
out, I don't log the beers I drink that often. When there is a beer in
front of me, most of the time I don't have time to log it using the tiny
buttons of the Android software keyboard. :)

So one of my collegues
said: you should be able to take a picture of the label or cap of the
bottle. The app should recognize this picture, and automatically fill
out the information about the beer.

Now this sounded like an
interesting project. I want to program such a thing. But I'm not sure
how to start.

I guess I need to develop some kind of backend, to
which you can upload pictures. Or maybe I can upload the picture to some
existing image recognition backend, and then do something with the
result.

I did a little Googling, and I found out about
`TinEye <http://tineye.com>`__, an online reverse picture search. Maybe
I can upload the pictures to TinEye (or something similar), and use the
result for searching the beer info in a backend database.

If I ever
succeed in programming such a service, I would be happy to implement
this into remembeer (if the source code will be available again some
time). I will any way contact the remembeer devs.

Now, what I want
to know from you, dear reader :-)



-  Do you know any existing open source app that does something similar
   to beer label recognition? I think there are apps for wine, but I
   doubt they are open source.
-  How would you interpret images of beer labels? Do you know any
   existing open source projects for image matching?
-  Are you a beer lover, and do you want to help me generating a
   database with pictures of labels/caps and info about beers?
-  Are you a programmer, and do you want to help me with the
   implementation of this project?



If you answer ‘yes’ to one of the above questions, and you want to
help me out, please contact me. 

\ **updated: Contact info**



-  `!beerscan <http://identi.ca/group/beerscan>`__ identi.ca group
-  Please upload pictures of beer labels/caps, and tag them with
   `#beerlabel <http://identi.ca/tag/beerlabel>`__.
-  I am still working on a web site for the project.
-  I am `@johanv <http://identi.ca/johanv>`__ on identi.ca
-  You can e-mail me: my address is my first name, followed by
   @losderover.be




