.. title: Installing Mint 13 next to Debian Sid on an already encrypted hard drive
.. slug: node-193
.. date: 2012-05-30 16:36:23
.. tags: linux
.. link:
.. description: 
.. type: text

I had a dual boot system with Debian Sid and some proprietary other OS
(\*cough\* wind\*cough\*s). The Debian installation is installed on 3
encrypted partitions, with LVM on top of them. I installed Linux Mint 13
next to the Debian system (also on the encrypted systems), so that I now
have a triple boot setup: Linux Mint 13, Debian Sid and Windows. I
thought it would be interesting to document how I did it, and what
issues I ran into.

Before I started, I uninstalled all
kernel-image-\* packages from my debian system, except the one
corresponding to the kernel I was actually using. This will eventually
reduce the number of choices in the grub boot menu when finished. I
backed up all in ``/boot``, to be able to recover the original dual boot
configuration in case of something going wrong. (Of course you should
backup your whole system, and not only ``/boot``, but hey, we all know
how this goes, don't we.)

I
`downloaded <http://www.linuxmint.com/download.php>`__ the
64-bit-live-DVD for Linux Mint 13 with Cinnamon, and I put it on an
USB-stick using `unetbootin <http://unetbootin.sourceforge.net/>`__.
Then I booted from the USB stick.

The first thing to do, was
enabling lvm, and decrypting my encrypted
partitions:\ ``\napt-get install lvm2\nmodprobe dm-mod\ncryptsetup luksOpen /dev/sda6 crypt_sda6\ncryptsetup luksOpen /dev/sda7 crypt_sda7\ncryptsetup luksOpen /dev/sda8 crypt_sda8\nlvscan``

sda6,
sda7 and sda8 are my encrypted partitions. The lvscan showed that all my
logical volumes were found and active, so I didn't have to
``vgchange -a y`` the volume group.

Now I had to create a new
partition for the root file system of my Mint installation. I had more
than 100 GB left on my volume group, so this was not a
problem.\ ``\nlvcreate -L 20G -n mint-root vg-debian\nmkfs.ext4 /dev/vg-debian/mint-root``
(My
volume group is called 'vg-debian', because it was created this way by
the debian installer. This doesn't make sense with multiple distro's
installed onto it, but what's in a name anyway.)

To be sure, I ran
``partprobe``, and then I started the mint installer.
First I had to
choose the partitions to use. For ``/boot``, ``/home`` and swap, I took
the existing ones from the Debian setup. As root partition, I chose the
freshly created ``mint-root``. I marked only the latter to be
formatted.

The installer complained about system partitions not
being empty, and it told me it might erase them. I guess it was
referring to the ``/boot`` partition, but as will turn out, most of the
files on there will just stay where they are.

After the
configuration of the partitions, the installer started copying files,
and asked me where I live. I chose 'Brussels', and then the installer
froze. Partly. The progress bar of 'copying files' was moving, but for
the rest nothing happened. I waited until the progress bar was
completely full, but it kept being unresponsive. So I just killed the
installation process, and I was left with a half-installed system.
Exciting :-)

Luckily I was installing from a live CD, so I got a
browser to search for help. On the Mint Forum I found a post which
described more or less `what the Mint installer actually
does <http://forums.linuxmint.com/viewtopic.php?f=141&t=71159&start=0>`__.
So I could continue the installation process manually. My mint system
appeared to be mounted under ``/target``. First of all, I edited
``/target/etc/crypttab``, and put the following
in:\ ``\ncrypt_sda6\t/dev/sda6\tnone\tluks\ncrypt_sda7\t/dev/sda7\tnone\tluks\ncrypt_sda8\t/dev/sda8\tnone\tluks``
This
is needed to get the information of the encrypted partitions in the
initrd. Then I chrooted into the new system, and installed the necessary
packages for encrypted
lvm:\ ``\nchroot /target\nmount -t sysfs none /sys\nmount -t proc none /proc\nmount -t devpts none /dev/pts\napt-get install cryptsetup lvm2``
I
set the root password:\ ``\npasswd``
and created a
user.\ ``\nadduser johan2``
Initially I gave my user a different user
name (johan2) than on the Debian system (johanv). This will create a new
home directory. Then I just rename the new
user:\ ``\nusermod -l johanv johan2``
Now I have a user johanv, with
home dir ``/home/johan2``. I do this because I typically have the
following directory in my /home file system:

-  ``/home/johan1`` *(home directory for system 1)*
-  ``/home/johan2`` *(home directory for system 2)*
-  ``/home/johan-shared`` *(files I share between the two systems)*

In ``johan-shared``, there are my settings for e.g. mutt and pidgin,
and my develop-subdirectory. In the actual homedirs (``johan1`` and
``johan2``) I have symlinks to the files in ``johan-shared``. Whenever I
switch to another distro, and I notice I need something from my previous
homedir, I move these files to ``johan-shared``, and put links in all
homedirs. 

At last I installed the bootloader: (I just accepted the
defaults)\ ``\ndpkg-reconfigure grub-pc``
Moment of the truth:
rebooting into the fresh
system.\ ``\numount /dev/pts\numount /proc\numount /sys\nexit\numount /target/dev\numount /target/home\numount /target/boot\numount /target\nreboot``
The
grub menu was shown, but when I booted into Mint, my screen showed some
noise, and nothing else happened. Apparently the system was waiting for
the password of the encrypted disc, but it didn't show a message that
told me so. So I just entered the password, and I saw the disc activity
indicator flickering. I had to enter the password two more times
(because I have 3 encrypted volumes), and finally I had a running Mint
system. More or less.

First problem: the mouse wasn't working
correctly. When I clicked somewhere, the actually click was registered a
little to the left of the mouse pointer. This was an annoying problem,
but quickly resolved after installing the software updates. I tend to do
this via the command
line:\ ``\napt-get update\napt-get upgrade\napt-get dist-upgrade``

After
a while a second problem appeared. The system froze. But this is no new
problem for me. I have an NVidia Quadro FX 1800M video card, which makes
the free nouveau driver crash from time to time. This is a problem I
have noticed on different distributions. So I installed the freedom
hating nvidia driver (press the ‘super key’ (AKA the win\*\*\*-key),
enter 'driv', and the menu item 'Additional Drivers' will pop up. This
tool will automagically install the driver for you). Installing the evil
driver fixed the problem of not prompting for passwords as
well.

One last thing left to do: make the old Debian installation
available via the grub menu. For this, I needed the backup of my old
``/boot``, to look at the original ``/boot/grub/grub.cfg`` file. I
copied the Debian GNU/Linux entries in there, and appended them under
``/etc/grub.d/40_custom``. And then:\ ``\nupdate-grub``
This appended
entries for Debian at the bottem of the grub menu, which now allows me
to boot into my old system as well. It also seems to create some extra
entries, which claim to start Mint with the old Debian kernel files. I
didn't try to boot these (yet).

