.. title: Upgrading the Xperia Mini Pro from CM 7.2 to CM 9
.. slug: node-197
.. date: 2012-08-24 20:55:31
.. tags: opensource,android
.. link:
.. description: 
.. type: text

Recently I upgraded my phone (Sony Ericsson Xperia Mini Pro) from
Cyanogenmod 7.2 to Cyanogenmod 9. And you should upgrade too, if you are
running Cyanogenmod 7.2. This is why:

-  The hardware keyboard layout can be configured from the settings
   menu.
-  The ‘symbols’ key on the hardware keyboard now actually works, so you
   don't have to switch to the software keyboard anymore when you have
   to enter an exotic symbol.
-  The dictionary on the software keyboard now works. Not that I ever
   use it, but hey, it might be useful for some of you.
-  The ‘dock’ at the bottom is more stable: it doesn't disappear for no
   reason, and the icons in it stay where they are.
-  Dragging icons from the app drawer to the main screen is a lot
   smoother.
-  CM 9 (based on Android 4) looks way cooler than CM 7.2 (based on
   Android 2.3).

But I went to some pain while upgrading the thing. So if you want
to perform a similar upgrade, here are two useful tips.

The first
one: Be sure to put not only the roms of `CM
9 <http://download.cyanogenmod.com/get/jenkins/5812/cm-9.0.0-mango.zip>`__
and the `Google
apps <http://cmw.22aaf3.com/gapps/gapps-ics-20120317-signed.zip>`__ on
your SD-card, but the ROM of the old `CM
7.2 <http://download.cyanogenmod.com/get/jenkins/2846/cm-7.2.0-mango.zip>`__
as well. If anything goes wrong, you can quickly flash the old image for
having access to your phone again.

Second thing: before flashing CM
9 to your phone, you'll probably have to upgrade your boot loader. I
didn't do that, and after flashing the ROM, the phone booted into a
black screen; removing the battery was the only option. Maybe you can
upgrade the boot loader with ROM manager, but I didn't try that. I just
used fastboot (a tool that can be found in the platform-tools folder of
the `Android SDK <https://developer.android.com/sdk/index.html>`__), as
described in steps 5 and 6 of the `excellent documentation on the
cyanogenmod
wiki <http://wiki.cyanogenmod.com/wiki/Sony_Ericsson_Xperia_Mini_Pro:_Full_Update_Guide#Flashing_CyanogenMod>`__.

The
new bootloader looks much slicker than the previous one, which was plain
ugly :-). And when it's installed, you should be able to flash the roms
for CyanogenMod 9 and the Google Apps for Ice Cream Sandwich. (But don't
come after me if things break, because I'm clueless as always.)

