.. title: Wireless networking on a Samsung Series 5 laptop with Linux Mint
.. slug: node-207
.. date: 2013-06-17 21:19:19
.. tags: ubuntu,tips,linux,hardware
.. link:
.. description: 
.. type: text

Wireless networking on a Samsung Series 5 laptop with Linux Mint
----------------------------------------------------------------


Last weekend, I installed `Linux Mint
15 <http://www.linuxmint.com/rel_olivia.php>`__ (Olivia) on a collegue's
`Samsung
notebook <http://www.samsung.com/us/computer/series-5-notebooks>`__. (I
did a ``lshw``, and it showed me '535U34C, Samsung SENS').

At my place, everything seemed to work OK (WPA2 and all), but when I
tried it at work, the wireless connection dropped every x seconds, and
needed to reauthenticate.

So I guess the problem depends on the type of wireless router.

I did some googling, and often I read that I had to pass the
``nohwcrypt=1`` option to the ath9k kernel module. Which did not work.
So I cluelessly tried some more suggestions, and finally I found a set
of options that do work:
``nohwcrypt=1 blink=1 btcoex_enable=1 enable_diversity=1``.

To try this out, you can do the following:

::

    rmmod ath9k
    modprobe ath9k nohwcrypt=1 blink=1 btcoex_enable=1 enable_diversity=1

(Maybe you have to log out and log on again after this command).

If it works, you can persist the settings, adding the following line to
``/etc/modprobe.d/ath9k.conf``

::

    options ath9k nohwcrypt=1 blink=1 btcoex_enable=1 enable_diversity=1

That worked for me. So I hope this information is useful for someone
else as wel.

Many thanks to `Sergei
Winitzki <http://orkultus.wordpress.com/2013/01/18/frequent-wireless-connection-drops-with-the-atheros-ar9462/comment-page-1/#comment-146>`__,
who posted the comment that saved my day.

-  `login </user/login?destination=comment%2Freply%2F207%23comment-form>`__
   om te reageren

